```js
({
  title: 'Consent',
  date: '2019-12-10 12:00:00',
  tags: ['consent', 'responsibility', 'safety', 'trust'],
  blurb: ``,
  description: '',
});
```

> "Consent occurs when one person voluntarily agrees to the proposal or desires of another."[^definition]

[^definition]: From the first sentence of the [Wikipedia entry on consent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consent).

"Consent" is my favorite topic. It's something we as a society do every day, and most of us have a pretty good idea of what it means, but how often do you think about the concept directly? How well do we really know what it means to consent to something?

## Consent

Like any word, "consent" will have subtly different meanings for different people. So, for the purposes of this post, I want to clarify a few points [^usemorewords] first.

[^usemorewords]: ["Use More Words"](https://gettingappsdone.com/episodes/use-more-words/) was an episode topic of the Getting Apps Done podcast!

The above definition has an important keyword: "Voluntarily". Consent has to be voluntary or it's not consent, it's coercion. For example: If I threaten to harm you until you do something, even if you eventually agree, it's coercion.

Along similar lines: If I ask you to do something, and you ignore me, are you consenting? Of course not! The default to consent is "no".

Finally: What if you change your mind later? You agreed, but once you start doing it, something comes up and you say "no". Nope, not consent. Consent can be _withdrawn_ at any time. (I expect this is the part of my definition of consent that the most folks will disagree with. Don't worry, we'll come back to this.)

So, let's try some examples:

"Eat this broccoli." Consensual? Maybe. This statement _assumes_ you've already agreed to my authority. Did you?

"Eat this broccoli or I'll ground you." Sounds like coercion, doesn't it? Now I'm threatening you.

"Eat this broccoli and I'll pay you 100 dollars." Would you eat broccoli for 100 bucks? If you say yes, then it's consensual. But only if you say yes.

## Trust

There's a problem with how I've described consent so far: Imagine I paid you 100 dollars to eat broccoli and then you withdraw without eating it! Maybe you took a bite and decided it was awful. Maybe a family emergency came up. Maybe you just changed your mind. It doesn't matter! You withdrew consent and now I'm out 100 dollars.

What would it take for me to trust you to do what you said you would?

For many, that answer is coercion. "Do your job or you're fired!" "If you don't follow the contract, I'll sue!" I threaten your future to get you to do what I want. To many this is common sense. Even if you don't like it, "it's just the way things are".

Let's see if we can do better than that.

This isn't a new problem. A simple example: Loans. Banks require down payments for this very reason. If there is risk in trusting you, you pay for that risk up front.

This creates two competing pressures: You don't want to consent to that (because you don't know what might come up in the future), and I don't want to risk my investment (knowing you can back out at any point).

Perfect! It's now a negotiation. Or maybe it's not: Maybe you're a friend and I already trust you. Maybe there are plenty of other examples of you being responsible and it's worth the risk.

The idea of 'gambling' a down payment looks a lot like coercion, but that subtle difference, consenting to pay for your risk up front instead of being threatened later, is an important one. At no point are you tied to a decision a previous "you" decided.

## Safety

I gave "Do your job or you're fired!" as an example of a form of coercion, and it often is. But why?

Safety. I'm threatening your safety. Without a job, how do you pay the bills? How do you get food and healthcare?

One of the reasons I like talking about consent in this way is because it highlights problems like these. In this case, an employee has a dependency for their safety on the employer that's separate from the job itself. The employer is now in the position where they can ignore the harm they could cause, or give up their own right to withdraw from any agreement.

The solutions for this one aren't simple - this is a product of the society we live in - but there are things you can do to _try_ to make things better.

There's an idea I'm trying to communicate in this post: That you can solve a lot of difficult problems by approaching them from the perspective of consent. "Do I have this person's consent? Do they understand all the possible repercussion? If they suddenly change their mind, am I prepared? Are they?" This perspective puts the problems right up front rather than waiting to handle them in some nebulous "future".

So, how could we solve this safety dependency? By paying for that risk up front! "Severance Pay" is a way this has been handled in the past. Be prepared to help them with their safety from the very beginning in case things don't work out [^severance].

[^severance]: The [Signal vs. Noise](https://m.signalvnoise.com/) blog had a good post on this subject: [How to make firing people suck less for them and suck more for you](https://m.signalvnoise.com/how-to-make-firing-people-suck-less-for-them-and-suck-more-for-you/)

## Impossible Responsibility

It's probably obvious at this point, but I want to state it anyway: Perfect safety is impossible. A severance package won't guarantee that this person's safety won't be impacted, it simply lowers the possibility.

And that's the goal! To get as close to perfect safety as we can. In tech, we'd call that ["high availability"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High_availability) and it's achieved by designing ["fault tolerant"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fault_tolerance) systems. You assume failures will happen and plan in advance for them.

On an individual basis, it's simply acknowledging that you'll mess up, and being as prepared as you can to take responsibility for it when it happens.

One last example: Imagine you're having a _bad_ day. You're exhausted. You want to get home as soon as you can and just relax. And your amazingly[^obnoxious] _happy_ neighbor says "hi"! They want to talk! You do _not_ consent to this, but it's going to happen anyway.

[^obnoxious]: obnoxiously

Your neighbor is _assuming_ consent, and if you ignore them they might call you "rude". It happens all the time, and a lot of our society is built around the ideas of what's acceptable to assume and what isn't, but consent is an individual thing, and it's something that changes all the time. Maybe tomorrow you would love to have that conversation!

So I have a challenge for you: Go out into the world and try to verify consent as much as you can. It's a skill you can learn through practice. In the above example: Maybe the neighbor could have made eye contact first, read your body language to see if you wanted to talk or not before interrupting you. They could have minimized their impact on your life.

There's a trick to doing the skill well: You have to accept that you won't always understand the "why" of people. They'll consent to things you never would, and won't consent to things you think of as normal. You just have to trust them...

-Kel
